# Endianness

When you have a binary number, say 1000100, is that written left-to-right or right-to-left? It's an arbitrary choice really, but you have to make one or the other choice. (Unless you want some other more complex scheme which I have never heard of.)

Little-endian means that the last number is smallest number. Big-endian means the last number is the largest.

So, little-endian, say writing 7 in binary: `111`. From the left to right, that's 4, 2, 1. The last number is the 0 or 1, it's the smallest. The first number is the largest. It's called 'little-endian' because the littlest number is at the end. Or that's how I like to remember it.

Big endian, writing 7 again is: `111`. But from left to right, it's 1, 2, 4. The last number is 4. The biggest is an the end. Big-endian.

See [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endianness):

> In computing, endianness is the order or sequence of bytes of a word of digital data in computer memory. Endianness is primarily expressed as big-endian (BE) or little-endian (LE). A big-endian system stores the most significant byte of a word at the smallest memory address and the least significant byte at the largest. A little-endian system, in contrast, stores the least-significant byte at the smallest address.[1][2][3] Bi-endianness is a feature supported by numerous computer architectures that feature switchable endianness in data fetches and stores or for instruction fetches. Other orderings are generically called middle-endian or mixed-endian.

Oh so there are endians that aren't either big or litte. Ha. Unsurprising perhaps.

#computers
#binary
#endian
