# Hashing

Lets say you want to know whether an integer is in a given set.

A hash function takes an input, like an integer, then returns another number in some range. `hash(i) -> 0 to K` (for some constant k).

It's a pure function in that the same input always produces the same output. Like for example, modolo division (calculating the remainder). `10 % 3 = 2`. Modolo with 3, the range is 0 to 2.

We then take the output of the hashing function and use it to index into a list of lists. Each list is called a 'bucket' and a bucket is itself a list.

[[2022-03-11-hash-to-bucket.png]]

If we want to know if a given input is in the hash table, we hash it, get the output of the hash, go to that bucket, then search the list at the bucket to see if it's present. If the list is short enough, it's very efficient.

A hash function is many-to-one. Many inputs produce the same output. It compresses the information in consistent manner. When one or more input result in the same output, it's called a collision

## The complexity of the hash table lookup?

Well, the hashing is constant given the size of the input. The main cost is the search of bucket, which is determined by how many elements are in the bucket plus whether the bucket is ordered on insert.

The more buckets there are, the less collisions there will be. But more buckets takes more space in memory. So we're doing the classic trade of time and space. If we dedicated enough space to the hash the buckets very never grow large and thus the lookup time will be constant i.e. `O(1)` which is pretty amazing. But obviously costs a lot of space depending on how many different inputs we want to store.

If the hash table is very small (extremis, there's only one bucket), then the lookup is `O(n)`, i.e. linear to the number of elements in the bucket, which is searched using linear search.

## What can be hashed?

Well, everything in a computer is ultimately a binary number, so anything can be hashed. But, if you want to use something as the key for a hashtable, then it needs to be immutable. The hash function produces the same output for the same input. But if the input changes, the hash output changes. So, you need the object to be a stable or immutable key. Otherwise you risk mutating the object and then loosing it's location in the table because the hash has changed.

#complexity
#algorithms
#hashing
#bucket
#manytoone
#collision
