# Linked List

If you have a list of elements of a fixed size, say a list of ints, where ints are all 2 units of memory, you can index into any element in the list if you know the starting position of the list in memory. The formula is a simple: `position = starting location + (no. of units allocated per element) * index`.

But what if you have a list of elements where the size isn't fixed? For example, in python, lists can contain anything. How would you lookup the elements?

Well, one way is the [linked list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linked_list). Probably the oldest implementation of a list of variably sized elements. In fact it was invented at [IBM in 1953](https://iq.opengenus.org/inventor-of-linked-list/) and was associated with the [Turing Award of 1975](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_Award).

In a linked list every element is a pointer to the next value and then the value itself.

So, you start the memory location of the beginning of the list. The first X bytes is the pointer to the next element. Then the remaining bytes between the end of the pointer and the beginning of the next element (a.k.a pointer and value) is the value.

This is a 'singley' linked list, in that you can only iterate the elements from the start to the end. You traverse forward but cannot traverse as backwards so easily. A 'doubley' linked list is where each element in the list has two pointers and the value. One pointer points to the next element, the other pointer points to the previous element. Thus you can traverse backwards or forwards.

To find the I(th) element of a linked list, you have to step through every single element's pointer. Thus, it's `O(i)` where i is the number of elements in the list. That's a linear cost compared with the number of elements in the list, which isn't great.

This isn't good for [[2022-03-06_1050_binary-search]] which is  `O(log2(length(list)))` log base 2 of length of the list, because binary search looks up elements in the list in the algorithm and would expect constant look-up time. Which is true for fixed size lists but not variable sized links lists. Thus the lookup is actually slower than the binary chop.

An improvement to produce a constant look-up for variable elements is called a [[2022-03-08_1726_dynamic-array]].

#complexity
#algorithms
#list
